[Applause]
[Music]
good
morning so I now have the joy of
introducing to you our first Speaker
this morning and also I have to say one
of my most influential teachers
Christopher bash Chris is Professor
ameritus in the department of philosophy
and religious studies at Youngstown
State University where he taught for
over 30 years in psychology of religion
transpersonal studies Buddhism and
Eastern religions for two years Chris
was the director of transformative
learning at The Institute of noetic
Sciences in Petaluma and he is also
adjunct faculty at CIS where each of his
classes feels like one is being held and
participating in a transformative sacred
container his Publications include life
Cycles the living classroom and his
groundbreaking work dark night early
Dawn this morning Chris will be speaking
on exploring the boundaries of death and
rebirth in LSD Psychotherapy please join
me in welcoming Chris
[Applause]
[Music]
bash good morning
everyone it's it's a true joy to join
you this morning in the continuing
celebration of Stan gr's extraordinary
lifetime accomplishment as a scholar A
Healer and a
Pioneer like many others in this room
Stan has had a profound influence on my
life he changed the direction of my
professional and the personal life the
turning point for me came in
1978 I just finished graduate school in
philosophy of religion which left me an
atheistically inclined agnostic
[Music]
and begun my career as a young academic
I was in a time of
transition and I didn't know it at the
time but I was in a Saturn return and I
read Realms of the human unconscious and
in that one reading I found my life's
work I was convinced that the people who
would make the most substantial
contribution to my field in philosophy
of religion would soon be writing out of
an experiential basis not simply a
conceptual basis and here was a man who
was opening up a methodology for
exploring the Deep psyche that was more
um had so much extraordinary potential
and with such solid scholarship behind
it that I knew I could trust this man so
I made the choice to begin what turned
out to be a 20-year Journey working with
high doses of LSD that lasted Between
1979 and
1999 and what I'm going to talk about
today basically comes out of my attempts
to understand my experiences on that
journey and after this journey my life
has never been the same how do you thank
someone for such a gift as
that the experience of dying and being
reborn is one of the central dynamics of
holotropic and psychedelic work and at
the same time it's deeply
puzzling this morning I'd like to share
with you my attempts to address three
basic questions about the death rebirth
Dynamic first question why does death
become as large as it sometimes does in
psychedelic therapy secondly why does
death repeat itself so many times in
this long process and third and perhaps
most difficultly why what is actually
dying in the death rebirth process
along the way I'd like to also revise
the discussion of death rebirth that I
presented in my book Dark Knight early
Dawn which I now find to be incomplete
now I'm just going to be giving you
quick bullet points this morning of an
article uh that discusses this in
Greater length this article will appear
uh there we go okay well back back okay
this is the book that Tom Roberts
mentioned yesterday edited by uh Harold
ABR Evans Ellens is Harold here raise
your hand this is a wonderful two volume
book many of the speakers who are
presenting here today are included in
this two volume work and you'll find a
more complete discussion of of what I'm
going to be presenting today
here
so let's jump into it why does death
become as large as it sometimes does in
LSD
Psychotherapy I wrote Dark Knight early
Dawn in part to answer this question so
I need to give you a little bit of
background my first two years of
psychedelic work were focused on the
perinatal level of Consciousness for two
years my sessions were filled with the
usual perinatal symptomology extreme
existential
confrontations uh convulsive seizures uh
and various forms of fetal
experiences and then this eventually
culminated in a death rebirth experience
that turned my life inside out and
snapped my identity like a twig I began
the day as a white middle class fresh
out of the IV League philosopher
obsessed with the meaning of life and I
was forced to become women uh hundreds
of women of color women with no
educational background women with no
philosophical
Horizons uh and it was frightening the
inversion of my uh values and
particularly the loss of my sexual
identity was shattering it was the
perfect hell for a male
academic when I lost the distinctions
that had defined my life I died and I
was reborn into a new world the world
the extraordinarily beautiful world of
the feminine explored under the arm of
the great
mother immediately after this a new
cycle began in which I was repeatedly
immersed in experiences of collective
anguish that dwarfed these early
sessions and shattered all my previous
frames of reference in this second phase
I entered an ocean of suffering that
expanded session by session until it
eventually encompassed the entire
history of the human race the dying in
these sessions was vast and Elemental in
scale and intensity one exerpt will give
the
flavor the anguish thickened into a
terrible horror acted out around me on
all sides the forms of the horror were
so many that there is no way to describe
it disemboweling by the score the
maulings of lives deaths in the
thousands swirling forms so complex
multi-dimensional and multi-thematic
that isolated images barely stand out it
was war savagery destruction killing and
anguish it lasted hours I know many in
this room have had had similar
experiences this phase of work lasted 4
years and 28 sessions one year of active
work then a six-year break followed by
three years of active
work my first interpretation of these
experiences was to see them as leading
to a deepening of ego death as leading
to a more complete ego death my
assumption was that if any form of death
were taking place in a session there had
to be pieces of dying in somewhere in
the mix pieces of ego dying somewhere in
the mix what did the sensation of dying
attached to if not to an
ego eventually however this assumption
was overwhelmed by the sheer volume and
intensity of the collective suffering
involved these episodes went on for too
many years and were too extreme in their
content for me to continue seeing them
as being drawn in through resonance to a
core of Unfinished ego death this forced
me to reassess the boundaries and the
goal of the entire therapeutic
Enterprise the conclusion I eventually
came to was that these Collective
episodes were not primarily aimed at the
transformation of my personal
Consciousness but rather they were aimed
at the transformation of and healing of
the species mind as a
whole in Dark Knight early Dawn I
abandoned the person centered narrative
I had been assuming that the goal of
therapy was the healing of the
individual and adopted a larger
narrative by integrating Rupert
sheldrake's concept of morphic fields
into stance Paradigm the way open to
viewing these Collective ordeals as part
of a larger process aimed at healing the
scars that Humanity still carried in its
Collective
memory I think that in these highly
energized States the field of the
collective psyche is sometimes activated
so intensely that it triggers a
collective healing process through some
fractal flip that I had not even thought
possible at the time the patient in my
sessions had stopped being me and had
become Humanity itself or some part of
humanity so I want to show you a couple
of slides but to do this I have to sort
of show you the vocabulary first Stan's
perinal matrices organized as a cycle
and then drawing upon Rick and Stan's
work on the correlations between the
planetary archetypes and the perinatal
matrices changing this into the glyphs
where one Neptune Saturn Pluto and
Uranus and then this image simply an
image to suggest the relationship
between ego represented as the little
drop at the bottom and the vast expanse
of ter of perinal of U the transpersonal
territory and the death rebirth cycle at
the perinal level at the interface
between personal Consciousness and
transpersonal
Consciousness in Dark Knight early Dawn
I kept the perinatal vocabulary to
describe these Collective ordeals but I
tried to stretch the rationale for their
appearance I proposed that a person's
experience of the Paran domain could
tilt or slant towards either the
personal or the transpersonal side of
that
interface if your par if your perinatal
experience tilted in the personal side
you might experience the loss of your
physical identity interwined with
reliving your biological birth but I
hypothesize that if your perinatal
experience tilted towards the
transpersonal side of the interface then
you might experience your death and
rebirth in in a state of profound fusion
with the human species in which case the
birth canal would become the birth canal
of
History I also suggested that there were
two tiers of death and rebirth operating
here one tier aimed at personal ego
death and another tier aimed at
Collective ego death trying to hold
these two
together at the present time however
I've shifted to what I think is a
simpler and more elegant way to
understanding these episodes
my current thinking emphasizes that
death and rebirth is an archetypal cycle
that repeats itself many times as we
move through deeper stages of
psychedelic unfolding it is a wheel that
like the wheel of Buddha Dharma turns
multiple times being an archetypal wheel
any single death rebirth experience can
draw in elements from multiple levels of
reality but being a cycle it repeats
itself in different forms as one moves
into deeper dimensions of
Consciousness so the essence of my
revision of Dark natly Dawn is this
rather than seeing these episodes of
collective suffering at least in my
experience as a protracted first turning
of the wheel of death and rebirth now I
see them as a second turning of that
wheel they are the second movement of a
larger Symphony a movement taking place
at the subtle level of Consciousness a
movement whose Dynamics are inherently
Collective focused on a collective
patient and aimed at a collective
transformation in a personal exch
exchange with Stan on this topic he
supported this revision he wrote me
quote I feel that for clarity we should
change the terminology and make it clear
that the term perinatal should be used
only for fetal experiences and not for
experiences of death death and rebirth
on higher levels of the transpersonal
spectrum with no relation to biological
birth so that brings us now to the next
question the second
question why does dying repeat itself so
many times in psychedelic
therapy let me return to my personal
story when this long phase of collective
dying and being reborn had ended it was
followed by a series of five
overwhelming positive sense sessions
that seemed to constitute a mega
rebirth I felt overwhelmed by grace and
filled with blessings I had a deep sense
that I had accomplish the primary
purpose of my entire
Incarnation at this point I didn't know
what to expect after all these years I
hoped that the dying the ordeal of dying
would stop sooner or later I thought
the transition to transpersonal reality
would become
easier and it would have I think if I
had stayed within the boundaries of
transpersonal experience that I had been
initiated into thus far but For Better
or For Worse the method of exploration I
was you I had chosen to use was so
powerful that it kept pushing me beyond
my experiential limits and I was working
with 5 600 micrograms in of elocity in
totally internalized sessions consider
you know the whole
works so another
image I don't have any interest vested
interest in how many cycles of death
rebirth and how you describe the
multiple levels of reality I'm going to
be using the language of psychic subtle
causal levels of reality but we may have
many different maps for mapping the vast
expanse of transpersonal territory it's
just the principle that I'm trying to
illustrate with this graphic
over the next 6 years and 35 sessions a
third phase opened in the work in which
I was propelled through a series of
death rebirth experiences that Drew me
ever more deeply into the
Divine I was spun into the radiance of
what the Buddhists call
Sakaya and what I came to call the
domain of diamond
Luminosity I had known light many times
before this but this was an exception Al
pure
light it was a different order of
reality
altogether its Clarity was so
overwhelming and its energy so pure that
returning to it became my only goal and
it completely extinguished any residual
interest I had in exploring dimensions
of archetypal reality that had
previously uh fascinated me this is
something
different when this phase was over I
counted six cycles of death and
rebirth there were many deaths of course
but six seminal
breakthroughs and it's the pattern of
experience that's important to the point
I'd like to make here that death and
rebirth is a cycle that repeats itself
at successive levels of initiation into
the
cosmos no matter how complete and
satisfying each rebirth was it was in
time followed by more experiences of
dying as the spiral continued to turn
death repeats itself not because it has
failed to hit the mark and ego has
survived but rather because the Divine
is an infinite landscape with countless
levels to
explore each death is a gateway to what
lies
Beyond in his beautiful book The
Ultimate Journey Stan describes some of
the forms that death can take at these
transpersonal levels he writes we mayid
ify with our ancestors or people from
different countries and historical
periods who are dying or whose lives are
threatened such sequences from the
collective unconscious can sometimes be
associated with the sense of personal
remembering which characterizes them as
past incarnational memories death can
even be experienced in full
identification with an animal or plant
death is also powerfully represented in
the collective unconscious as
mythological motifs of death and rebirth
and as very various eschatological
themes including specific death gods and
underworlds of various cultures the
archetype of death astral AR bardel
Realms the postumus Journey of the soul
and abodes of the
Beyond only Stan I think could write a
sentence like that I mean
really and you know he knows what he's
talking about that's what gives that's
what's so
amazing I really I wouldn't I don't
think I would have had the courage to go
some of the places I went if I had not
known that he had gone there before me
and lived to tell the
tale at whatever level it takes place
the core of dying is always the same
complete loss of control absolute
surrender a disorientation so deep that
it dissolves reality as we have known it
and rebirth is always the same the
experience of Awakening inside a new and
un anticipated dimension of reality the
birth of a new identity with new
capacities the experience of absolute
Grace of having been given infinitely
more than one has given
up but within this basic structure the
details of dying and being reborn
reflect the specific level of
Consciousness at which one is dying at
which one is working the experiential
texture of each death its flavor focus
and function and even I'd suggest what
is dying changes as the work
progresses after one has died and been
reborn many times eventually the very
concept of death loses its
meaning one learns through repetition
that at the deepest level of one's being
it's impossible to Die the form that you
are can die reality if as you have known
it can be destroyed multiple times but
the innermost essence of your being
always reemerges the Phoenix always
Rises Death Becomes simply a measure of
the degree of purification being enacted
when purification reaches so deeply that
it dissolves the form that you are then
dying has returned to Grace you and this
is what I mean by calling it
purification unto
death it was during this third phase
that I surrendered one more assumption
about the death rebirth process namely
that there is an ultimate end to this
cycle a final
death I no longer believe that this is
the
case I believe that the progression is
endless the dying stops when one's
capacity for Discovery is exhausted and
one simply can take no
more now let me qualify this carefully
because I know it goes against the
notion that a complete death is a final
death when one's private existence has
been dissolved one can enter a state of
Oneness that is completely and utterly
satisfying one rests in the source of
existence one with all that is you
cannot imagine anything more
satisfying and yet my experience has
been that with repeated immersion in
this condition New Dimensions of Oneness
eventually reveal themselves and new
levels of Joy are associated with each
of these
levels the one exists in many modalities
and therefore can be known in many
modalities always one but in different
depths of
expression so then that brings us
to what is it that's actually
dying and here I want to affirm a
delicate both and balance it's the
individual who undergoes these deaths
and absorb them they become part of his
or her life story and so they belong to
the
individual on the other hand I think
that these deaths also belong to the
universe in ways that transcend the
individual it is something it is doing
the universe uses these opportunities to
heal itself and commune with itself in
ways that reach beyond the individual I
think both these perspectives are true
and need to be
affirmed so what is done dying well
first in the early deaths particularly
the ego is dying the constrictions and
wounds the Illusions the habits that are
created by our Earthly
history but in the later sessions after
ego has surrendered its grip on our
Consciousness what exactly is dying then
there is often an acute sensation of
dying but what does it attach to well I
think part of the answer is some aspect
of the species ego is dying
when the wheel of death and rebirth is
turning at the subtle level of reality
where the deaths are largely Collective
what is dying I think is some part of
the species ego that is some collective
nodule of pain and suffering that's
living inside the collective
unconscious when the patient shifts from
being the individual to being the
species mind the pulse of life we are
living in those hours is the pulse of
human history
we may participate in this death and
rebirth but we do so less as an
individual and more as a fractal member
over the entire
species the coex systems that are
resolving themselves are not personal
coex systems at this point but
Collective coex systems in the
collective unconscious what I call the
metam matricies of the collective
unconscious but there's another level I
think that we can move to what's dying
at these levels and it's what I've named
the shamanic
Persona now all of us have had the
experience after a session has ended
that we sometimes can't hold on to all
the knowledge and all the experience and
all the insights we had during a session
And yet when we re-enter the Psychedelic
State we find that this missing
knowledge is there waiting for us and we
resume our psychedelic identity when the
next session
opens now this common experience
suggests that the psyche retains
integrates our psychedelic experiences
at levels deeper than our conscious
awareness eego ego State psychology has
demonstrated that this
compartmentalization of experience is
actually a common feature of our
psychological makeup and I'm thinking
here of the work of Gordon Emerson John
Rowen and Tom
zinzer I think ecostate psychology can
throw important light on how our psyche
manages the extreme fluctuations that
take place in awareness and psychedelic
therapy specifically I want to suggest
that in the repeated opening and closing
of awareness in psychedelic sessions a
semi-autonomous state specific
Consciousness is formed that retains and
integrates and preserves the knowledge
and the capacities that we had acquired
in our
sessions I call this psychedelically
generated entity the shamanic
Persona it can can be thought of as a
state specific Alter Ego there are many
variables which affect the Integrity of
the shamanic persona but basically as a
general rule of thumb the better run the
session the Tighter and more coherent
will be the shamanic Persona that
emerges now returning to an earlier
slide when one system begins to open to
levels of transpersonal reality that are
deeper than the levels that you have
previously been exposed to our earlier
psychedelic history must yield to this
deeper
territory our previous psychedelic
knowledge uh and the identity based on
that knowledge must surrender control
before a deeper mode of transpersonal
knowing can emerge and
stabilize in essence then what I think
is dying in these sessions is sometimes
the shamanic Persona its death may feel
like a personal death
but it's not the ego that's dying here
but rather a deeper individual identity
that has been birthed inside one's
previous
sessions one shamanic Persona may die
and be reborn multiple times after one
shamanic Persona dies and one's
experiences stabilizes at a deeper level
of transpersonal reality this second
shamanic Persona
will will retain the memories of the
first Persona and then will add to it
the memories of the knowledge and the
experiences from this deeper level down
the road when a still deeper level of
transpersonal reality opens the second
Persona will have to die and yield
surrender in order for transpersonal
experience to be stabilized at these
deeper
levels I'd like to suggest maybe one
more layer of the answer to this
question what is it that's actually
dying I think it's actually a dimension
of the cosmos
itself and here I am thinking primarily
about those deaths that take place at
what we might some have described as
causal level of
[Music]
reality first we might pause to ask what
could possibly die at these Sublime
levels of
reality what need do causal level
reality levels of causal levels of
reality have of rebirth at all I don't
know the final answer to these questions
I can only share some intuitions that I
formed over the years and to do so I
need to very quickly invoke Shri
arabindo involutionary evolutionary
cosmology because his vision resonates
so deeply with the cosmology that
emerges in psychedelic States as Stan
has described so beautifully in his book
The Cosmic
game arabindo vision is of a cascading
involution of the Divine generating
multiple levels of reality all of the
all Divine but with but within those
multiple levels a descending scale of
self-awareness of
divinity like a series of one-way
mirrors the Divine looking down sees all
but the Divine looking up sees
less now at the end of Dark Night early
Dawn in the last chapter I made a the
point that in such a
multi-level
cosmology a death rebirth event can
function
simultaneously as a Liberation From
Below to the above and an infusion of
above to the below you can often stand
at that threshold and you can feel the
the energy moving in both
directions so a death rebirth can
function as ascent and also as
descent so as assume for a moment that
we have managed to stabilize experience
at the low causal level for a few
precious hours inside our sessions we
exist as a life form that breathes the
rarified air of caal reality bathing in
Divine
Oneness when through further exercises a
doorway opens to still deeper levels of
Cal reality it allows a cosmic communion
to take place deep commune with
deep bringing different levels of
transpersonal reality into conscious
communion with each other even if only
for a few hours seems to nourish and
bring joy to The Weave of existence as
the below remembers the above and the
blessings of above pour themselves into
the below it is a cosmic dance taking
place between deep levels of the Divine
it is God communing with
God so what dies and is reborn at these
deeper cycles of death and
rebirth beyond the ego beyond the
species ego Beyond a series of shamanic
personi I think what dies and is reborn
is something of truly Cosmic
proportions some Dimension no God is
calling some
Dimension that is extraordinarily vast
surrenders and in that surrendering
awakens more completely to itself and
much to our surprise the Divine appears
to genuinely appreciate our help in
facilitating this
communion Stan thank you from the bottom
of my heart thank you
[Applause]
[Music]